Ladies and Gentlemen,
welcome to this panel discussion
dedicated to the very interesting topic
To the topic of
Digital solutions and digital threats
in pandemic times
My name is Aneta Zachová
and I'm editor-in-chief of EURACTIV.cz
and I'm happy that I have
the opportunity
to moderate this panel
Just to briefly introduce the topic
Modern technologies have shown us,
especially in the past months,
that they can be very
useful and helpful
in emergency situations
They were used to mitigate the impacts
of a pandemic
Among the most popular technologies,
there were tracing apps,
for example,
that were notifying their users that
they could
for example
Be in contact with an infected person
Also,
there were prominent technologies
when it comes to
artificial intelligence
that were used,
for example,
for the predictions of the pandemic
But they were also used to
let's say
improve the implementation of
restrictive measures
Therefore we have to say that
deploying modern technologies means that
we are skating on thin ice
And to be honest with you,
I'm very curious about
what experts of digitalization
and connected fields
will tell us in the next 60 minutes
So, dear participants of
Going Digital conference
let me introduce you our great speakers
I'm very happy that here in studio
Virtual studio
is Mr. Ole Jann
Assistant professor at the Centre for
Economical Research
and Graduate Education Economics Institute
SERGE
which is a joined workplace
of Charles University and the
Czech Academy of Science
Then I am also very happy
that we have online speakers here
Among them Patrick Breyer
Member of the European Parliament
and the German Digital Rights Activist
Then I'm also very happy that I can
welcome here Jan Kulveit
Senior Researcher at the Future of
Humanity Institute
at the University of Oxford
Then it's my pleasure to welcome here
Patrick Zandl
Czech digital entrepeneur,
Expert
and also member of
the Czech Pirate Party
Before we start our discussion,
I would like to ask all our participants
to interact with us through Slido
You can write there your comments
or questions
and I would be happy to address them
or not me, but my distinguished guests
But now let's start with the discussion
beacuse we have only 60 minutes
We have a very interesting topic
and we have great speakers here
So let me start with the first kind of
kickoff question
For Mr. Breyer
As I told in the beginning,
We see that
tracing apps were very useful
in the times of pandemic
You could see that
many national governments
included these apps
into their national strategies in the
fight against COVID-19 pandemic
For example, in Czech Republic we had,
we still have, eRouška
In Italy, it was the application Immuni
and most of the countries in Europe
have deployed these types of application
And my question for you is
Mr Breyer, can we say that these
tracing apps are safe
when we are considering the data
privacy and data protection
Please, Mr Breyer,
the floor is yours
Thank you Aneta and good morning
everybody
Yes, I'm not quite convinced
that these apps are the key solution
to the pandemic
and in tracking it
They are generally poorly spread
So not very many people are using them
And so far, the contacts
Tracing the contacts of infected people
and notifying them
has been done by humans
And a study say that
this protects us much better than an app
And would also avoid massive numbers
of false alarms
due to those apps not being able
to detect walls,
etcetera pp
And the great risk is that
once this technology is in use
it could be made mandatory
to track people also for other purposes
What we've seen is that,
at least in Poland,
the home quarantining app
requires regular check ins
and it makes you wonder
if it's effective
because you could still invite people
to your home, right?
and nobody would see
South Korea's app is actually using GPS
to track locations also in cases
of quarantine breaches
Yes, Thailand is actually
making travellers
use an app
to enforce their quarantine
and also to track their movements
And I think the government
should provide
sufficient protective equipement
to healthcare
At testing facilities
we need to have vaccine supplies now
and prepare properly
for future pandemics
That is, I think, what is key
and not collecting location data
Thank you very much
Just heard a bit skeptical approach
towards these tracing apps
And I'm wondering, Mr. Jann
what do you think about it?
Do you agree with what
has been said by Mr. Breyer or?
What do you think about
these tracing apps?
Should we really use them massively?
Should they be, for example, mandatory?
What do you think about that?
I mean, I agree in broad strokes
I think they are relatively safe
At least the kind of the broad principle
of bluetooth tracing
I mean, it doesn't collect a lot of data
So the broad principle is
relatively safe
But I agree that
the main question is really
are they effective at all?
And do they really?
I mean, to my knowledge,
there is no country
where they really yield a measurable
or large contribution to fighting
the pandemic, right?
So even in countries where they have
a penetration
of maybe 40% or so
Then that would mean
In theory, they could maybe
find 15%
but then people don't have
their bluetooth switched on
and there's walls
and all kinds of stuff
so maybe they could help finding
I mean, with great penetration
they could help finding
5% of infections or so, right?
So that's not a huge effect
and I think we should also
not get distracted by that
As Patrick Breyer has said,
We really need investments into human
contact tracers
and we need investing into testing
and those are the political choices
that have to be made
And so
Just
These apps I really
I mean
We didn't know in the beginning
It could have been that
they played a larger role
It was a new situation
But in the end I think
they're not very effective
Should they be mandatory, I think
That would also be counterproductive
And first of all,
I don't think they would
increase the effectiveness very much
But it would, of course,
lead to a huge backlash
that suddenly the government
wants you to have
apps on your phone
that track and trace you
And it would,
I mean,
Even though the apps themselves
are relatively safe in data terms
You would then have to build
a surveillance infrastructure
to check whether people
actually use the apps
So that would defeat the purpose of
having good privacy apps
So that I think
would be very inadvisable
making any of this mandatory
Thank you very much Mr. Jann
I have now a question for Mr. Zandl
who is connected to us virtually
We were talking about the effectiveness
of the tracing application
What do you think?
How to make these applications
As much as possible
But while protecting the privacy
and the data of the users?
Please Mr Zandl
Hello everybody
Going back in the time,
in the spring
we were worried about what the
paid solution would like
would like to see
That is why we started to prepare
our own eRouška application
in the volunteer activity COVID19 CZ
And this application
was based on strict principles
for personal data protection
Above all,
it was not intended
to work with the location
or with the usernames
And it was just based
on the voluntarity
And this application succeed
using Bluetooth,
not using GPS,
protecting your personal data
That was our choice
And i need to say
there was a possibility
that the Czech Republic
would use Israelian application
which is quite invasive
in the user data
Surveilling the user
without his permission
And that was the possibility
we would like not to accept
Thank you very much
I have a follow up question
for Mr. Kulveit
Literally, the same question
as I already gave to our other speakers
What do you think about the
effectiveness of these tracing apps?
Do you think that
they can really help us
to tackle the pandemic?
Or what are the barriers
of their effective use?
Please Mr. Kulveit
Good morning
So
As all have said,
they are not very effective
It was not clear, like,
from the beginning
But I think now
they are in some sense
like part of the solution
but only a relatively small part
It’s not the core of the strategy
Maybe
Connecting a bit
to the previous speakers,
I think in all anticovid measures
typically the question,
the right question isn't
whether like this measure is
better than some other measure
Whether, I don’t know,
better personal protective equipment
is better than the tracing apps
But in a sense like every person counts,
every person that people traced or
the spread of the disease prevented counts
So tracing the correct measure is
basically look at something like
cost versus benefits of the measures
So if it’s a measure
reduces the reproduction
but it’s just like 3 persons
it can mean that like, I don’t know,
one more year of school could be open and so on
So
I think they are not
the core of contact tracing
in any Western country
At the same time,
they still seem to be
pretty cost efficient
if they're like connected
to some broader
test and trace strategy
Thank you very much Mr. Kulveit
I have again question for Mr. Breyer
Because you have kind of
a European perspective,
let's say
When there was this problem of the COVID
and the national borders were closed
Many people thought that
with these applications
it would be much more easier,
for example,
to travel also in the times of pandemic
That the national tracing apps
will be somehow connected
so we could share the data
But if i'm not mistaken,
I don't think that this is
something that really happened
that we have this kind of
connected tracing apps in Europe
I see that Mr. Kulveit
maybe wants to add something
if I'm not mistaken
Please Mr. Kulveit
Yeah, actually the apps
which are using
the Google and Apple protocol
are like interoperable
So it’s not actually true
they are not connected
They're running on the same protocol
As in the governments
running the applications are
right now working on
making them like interoperable
in the sense that, if you have
a positive result from Germany
it will be messaged if you
met people from other countries
This is not a case that
they wouldn’t be interoperable at all
Thank you very much
Let’s go back to Mr. Breyer
What do you think about this connectivity of
the European tracing application?
Is it truly working?
We just heard that the applications
are interoperable
but are they really working currently?
Please Mr. Breyer
Well from the German experience
I know that they had a lot of problems
that these apps
weren’t working for weeks
and they only found out later
and then some users,
depending on the system configuration,
didn't actually receive
warnings and alerts
so there were technical problems
But what you mentioned
was the risk indeed
that they would use the opening up
to make this
and allowing travels dependening
on agreeing to using the app
and that would really be
an indirect obligation to use it
and that was a great risk
but it’s true that
it hasn’t happened in Europe so far
And people can have good reasons
not to use these apps,
not only because they don't trust them
but also maybe they don’t want
to carry a mobile phone
If you carry a mobile phone
then the operator
will be tracking you anyway
and collecting the data
about your location in the database
which can be used to incriminate you
if you have been to a protest
where, you know,
criminal offences occurred
Or even if you’ve been
in the wrong place at the wrong time
you could be targeted by the police
or some crime happened nearby
etcetera pp
And people can have good reasons
for not using them
Also in my case, for example,
I don't use
either Android nor Apple iPhone
but I actually use
a free open source operating system
where I could theoretically
examine the code
and make sure it is safe
and these apps don’t even work
on open source mobile operating systems
Meaning that they are
actually using operating systems
that are closed source partly
you don’t know what’s happening
and you also don’t know what's
happening at the receiving end
So whether the server is
actually logging requests
for example,
it’s logging your IP address
You can’t be sure
So
The roles of these apps is really
a large scale social experiment
that involves digital
behaviour recording
under state supervision
for the first time really
And that is the risk in it
and that’s why I think
that the benefit
needs to be balanced
against the risks
And even if it could, you know,
trace some percentages of infections
if there are alternatives
that don’t come with those risks
we should definitely look into
those and prefer those
And I have maybe
a follow up question for you
Do we have these types of alternatives
without risks?
Can you name them if we have some things
we can use for this tracing
but without these risks?
Yes, what works very well is
human tracing
so you basically ask people
where they have been
and whom they have been in touch with
and usually it works much better,
as it has been said,
because many people just won't be using
and carrying the app anyway
The manual tracing is more effective
If you reach out to people actually
Of course you may not trace all contacts
but the app will trace even less
Thank you very much
I just now want to ask our participants
to give us questions comments
You can write in the chat
and I would be happy to address it here
I have now a question for Mr. Jann
We are still discussing
about the tracing apps
and I would like to stick
to this topic a bit longer
I'm interested in like
are the people really willing
to install these applications?
or do you think
they are considering these risks
that for example,
Mr. Breyer has just told us?
Are they aware of this?
And do you think it can,
for example, distract them
from the installation of
these tracing apps?
Please
So first of all, a quick comment
to Patrick Breyer
I mean, the human contact tracing
is not without risks either
because also you collect
a lot of personal data in that
and I think there has also been
a bit of cavalier attitude
at least in some countries
about how to deal with this data
You know, if my contact tracer
well I never had that call fortunately,
but if a contact tracer calls me
and says where have you been?
And I say ‘Oh you know,
then I went out with my wife,
and then I went out with my girlfriend
and then I visited my second family
and all these things, right?
So how is this data being taken care of?
and how do these incentives interact
with people incentives
to actually cooperate with this kind
of contact tracing
So now are people aware of
the risks of the apps?
I think we see the same there
as we see in general discussions
of privacy in the population
That some people are overly sensitive
Some people say I will never allow
anything on my phone
And some people are kind of under sensitive
and say, you know,
I have nothing to hide
so i have nothing to fear
All of these quite simple but
too simple arguments that we know
So my feeling was that
the discussion of tracing apps is
really very quickly fell into these old
front warfare between these groups
And I think not that much
or I mean, not as much progress
as we could have hoped
was made beyond that
So that the very basic point that
bluetooth tracing apps
doesn't need location data
as Patrick Zandl pointed out,
basically doesn't need any kind of data
that we would consider
sensitive personal data
That very basic point I think
was often lost in the discussion
between nothing to hide,
nothing to fear
and you know, tomorrow in 1984
the government will take all our data
and put us into slavery
So those extreme discussions
kind of drowned out
a lot of the reasonable debate
I felt on this topic
Thank you very much
I have a follow up question
for Mr. Zandl
Because Mr. Zandl is pretty much aware
of the situation in the Czech Republic
Of our eRouška application
We just heard that eRouška is
using the Bluetooth technology
it's not like ran on the data
So it doesn’t need to
get our data from people
But still
for example me
as one of the users of the eRouška
I know that everytime I switch it on
It takes battery and so on
And so i'm interested in like
how the people in the Czech Republic
really reacted to this possibility
to have this kind of application
I don't’ know if you could, for example,
tell us how efficient was eRouška
in the Czech Republic
Given the fact that, let’s say,
that this type of application
is not connected with
as many risky situations
For example as was mentioned in Poland
when the users have to
check in regularly
So please could you tell us something
more about this Czech eRouška?
Please Mr. Zandl
Hopefully
Hopefully I can
I need to say we have tried all three
approaches
to this application
Even GPS based location
it was included in Mapy.cz
Which is the largest
Czech geographic portal
Over 1 million users follow
this mobile application
And inside this application was
GPS tracking for the location
and if you met somebody
who was COVID positive
you received some notice
But this was devastating your battery
and of course it was
devastating your privacy
even when we promised you
or Seznam,
the owner of the application,
promised you not to give
the data outside the company
This is one approach
The second approach is eRouška
going through the Bluetooth
Total privacy
And not so much devastating the battery
And the third approach is localization
through the mobile network
Because each mobile network knows
where is your mobile phone
the accuracy is not so nice
but several tenths or
hundred meters is enough
And this is even a big invasion
in your privacy
And even we don’t like this approach
About some statistics
or what was the experience
We have almost no complaints
about eRouška
Of course many journalists ask
‘How does it work?’
We explain a lot how does it work
Everybody have on the beginning fear
how the application will track him
But it was an open source application
Everybody can look in the source codes
and go through the code
And evaluate the privacy impact
And what was the question?
Yes
Thank you very much Mr. Zandl
We were talking about the
Czech application eRouška
and I have here a question
from one of our participants
Oh yeah I see
Yes
Maybe it’s a question for you
Mr. Zandl or for Mr. Kulveit
The question is
In your opinion,
which COVID tracing apps
were successful in insight
and were they worth their price?
I don’t know, maybe Mr. Zandl you would
like to address this comment
Yeah
Quite important is not the type
of collecting the data for the users
But integration to the state processes
What does it mean?
If you are COVID positive in
some applications in some states
You get in the application
a confirmation for your employer
that you are sick
and you could stay home
And you can send it directly
through the application
The same way you will
become invitation for the test
Or the letter from your doctor
It means the communication is totally
digital and totally integrated
In the Czech Republic
this system doesn’t work
You just become the notice if you are
positive or negative after the test
But integration is not tied
and during the wrong situation
But it has nothing to do
with the application
but with the lack of digitalisation
of Czech state processes
Thank you very much
We just gave quite like a critical
insight about the connection
between the application and the,
for example, tracing teams
or something like that
Maybe Mr. Kulveit, I don't know,
you have maybe a European perspective
So maybe you know how does it,
for example,
work in other European countries
Mr. Kulveit,
could you tell us if
in Europe, for example,
or around the whole world
Do we have some kind of
really successful tracing app
That is for example also addressing
these problems mentioned by Mr. Zandl?
Yes so
I mean, I think like
Okay
I think the contact tracing application
I’m not an expert on contact tracing
applications in Europe maybe
But I guess like more knowledge
of the landscape
So I know for example the UK
contact tracing app
is also used for tracing people
visiting restaurants and so on
So it's not just like Bluetooth
but you scan QR codes
and if you get the notification like
you are invited to get tested and so on
So I think it could be a valuable part
of some like overall strategy
Its difficult to
So far it's a bit difficult to evaluate
what's really successful
Like worldwide I would say in some sense
in like dealing with pandemic
Probably like the applications in
places like China are pretty effective
at tracing the contacts
and finding people who are infected
So from my perspective the question
the question which Europe or
people in Europe should ask
is basically how to have
effective solutions
at the same level
of efficiency as in China
and have privacy at the same time
So instead of this like push and pull
which like all have mentioned,
finding about whether
any data would be used
or any technology would be used
or it would be old plain humans
calling over the phone
which also doesn’t work so great
So instead of despite
I think the big question
for the future is
how to have the best of both worlds
And I don't think this is a purely
hypothetical question
where like can say ‘Okay we hate the
Chinese approach to privacy
and we will fight
to our last breaths to avoid it’
I mean in some broader context
a lot of developed countries
are looking for where to develop
or what to do
Western countries have like a lot of
power in being role models and so on
in handling things in a good way
So basically my worry
about bureau landscape is like
If EU decides
'Okay we will basically resign
at choosing data in a reasonable way'
we‘ll try to protect privacy
at all costs
Even at the cost of
like worse governments
and worse ability to deal
with stuff like pandemics
Like a big part of the world
Considering a few billion people
will look at China and they will see
'Okay but the Chinese way
maybe works better’
People are not dying in China
The economy is growing
So maybe
Asian or East Asian or Chinese
or Taiwanese approach to privacy
is maybe all things considered better
and maybe it's better to sacrifice
privacy in sake of economic growth
and saving lives and so on
So I think we are risking in like
dealing the situation badly
it's basically probably privacy
of like a few billion people
Not necessarily people in Europe
So I would like to fight
for solutions which are
at the same time privacy protecting
and at the same time are efficient
So I think European applications are
typically too much on the side of
protecting privacy at like
at the cost of not being efficient
Applications elsewhere
are more efficient
and in big part
it's a technological problem
how to design something which works well
and protects the privacy
Which is typically more difficult
It needs cryptography and so on
But I think this is a bigger question
for the future
Not for COVID
With COVID like vaccination will
probably start pretty soon
Sorry for the longer time
No, it's absolutely okay
Thank you very much Mr. Kulveit
Mr. Jann we just heard
from Mr. Kulveit that
in the future we have to
find this balance
between the effective fight
against COVID and the data protection
And that we can for example also learn
some experience from Asian countries
that are not so fixed on this
data protection as we Europeans
Do you think that we have
already some lessons learned
from this tracing versus data protection
for future emergency situations such as
pandemic or something like that?
Do we already know what we should,
for example,
do in the next emergency situation?
So I think I agree with
Honza Kulveit there
I mean for COVID
it's kind of too late already, right?
So
Because the, I mean,
One the one hand the basic principle is
we really don't need sensitive data
to trace
I mean, in theory we don't need sensitive data
to trace infections
We really just need proximity data
and then I mean one number
that you can call
and say ‘hey you've been in touch
with someone’
But
The technological and also the kind of
the conceptual hurdles to that
are immense, right?
Because then we still
I mean, how do we collect
the data in such a way
that we have exactly the data
that we need
And not collect a lot of personal data
on the way, right?
And this is where,
as Honza has said,
Different countries are taking different
approaches and are on different sides
And I think there is this middle
weight that was mentioned
But we need
My guess is that we need
several more decades of
having a better understanding of
what data actually is
What privacy actually is
How differential privacy can work
How cryptography can work to protect
To on the one hand protect private data
but also make it useable
for some purposes and so on
And there I think we're just
I mean we will need
we have the hardware technology
to some extent
But we need several more decades
of conceptual research
to be able to really understand these
questions and solve these questions
So I think even if
it's quicker than that
I think that for COVID
we will be too late
Yeah
Thank you very much
I have a similar question for Mr. Breyer
Do you think that we have found
this kind of balance
between the privacy protections
and between the effective fight
against COVID and these kinds of things?
Are we now more ready
for future challenges
based on our past experience
from COVID19 crisis?
Please Mr. Breyer
I have my doubts
whether there are sufficient plans
and contingency measures
for the next pandemic
Which is pretty much certain
to come in the future
I don’t think
all lessons have been learnt
What we’ve seen in Europe is a very
desperate approach to the crisis
So every national government
went ahead and, you know,
just implemented their own measures
without coordination
They closed down the borders
thinking that the risk was people
from other European countries
Which wasn’t at all
Not an effective measure at all
And let me also stress
In comparison to Asia the key to
containing the pandemic
is not surveillance
that maybe is used over there
But the key is really
precautionary measures
and making sure that the number
of contacts is decreased in time
Before the numbers start exploding
And those are political choices
and we’ve seen some countries in Europe
that have dealt very well
In line with strong privacy policies,
and we’ve seen others that
didn’t do well with the pandemic at all
But it didn't have anything to do
with the technology or surveillance
I think that when it comes to the apps
everybody should have the free choice
whether to use them or not
and I would also like to acknowledge
that those Bluetooth based systems
you know on the open designs like EPEP
or DP Consortium self designed
They are designed
in a privacy friendly way
and therefore I would like to
thank everybody
who was involved in their development
and preventing worse
But still
even these apps with the privacy
friendly design come with 12 risks
of abuse
As it has been counted
for data protection impact assessment
Even the Bluetooth tracing
Even though these risks may sound
alarmist or paranoid or over sensitive
we’ve really seen too often governments
seize something that
has been introduced once for a specific
purpose
in a data protection friendly way
to seize this
To make it permanent to use it
for other purposes
And abuse it
And there has been nobody
less than Edward Snowden
who has been warning that
this pandemic is being used
to deploy technology that
will become permanent
and that will be expanded later on
We are already seeing outside Europe
that they’ve used it
to introduce facial recognition
To bring drones policing people
And since somebody mentioned China
China is really rapidly turning into
a digital dictatorship
It may be that people
aren't dying there but
They have been arrested for
I don't know, for their religion,
for their thoughts
And sometime they're even being tortured
They are being detained in camps
And in no way and respect
should we ever think
you know, what China is doing
is worth looking into
That is a oppressive dictatorship
And should not be used
as a reference in Europe at all
Thank you very much
I would like to now maybe move
a bit to the topic
you have already mentioned Mr. Breyer
It means, for example,
facial recognition softwares
and other new technologies
that are based, for example,
on artificial intelligence
Because we do not have
only these tracing apps
as a kind of new way how fight pandemics
But we have also artificial intelligence
Mr. Kulveit can you tell us how
the artificial intelligence helped us
to tackle the pandemic?
Do we have any tangible results?
Please Mr. Kulveit
Yeah so I think artificial intelligence
is now used as a buzzword
for like all kinds of stuff
So I would say like
proper artificial intelligence
didn't the help us basically at all
I think it's quite unrelated
Like plain old mathematical modeling
which is pretty boring term for
using some equations and number
was pretty useful
And some machine learning
techniques say like
It's like
Normal statistical methods are pretty
useful for evaluating all kinds of stuff
making predictions and so on
I would not consider it
as artificial intelligence topic
But I can answer some things
about statistical modeling
Sorry for that
I still feel some urge to reply
a little bit to Patrick Breyer
So I think there is a dangerous policy to
to say that China is doing
some horrible things,
like torturing people,
And for that reason any reference
to China is like invalid
and shouldn’t be done at all
I mean
China is like a pretty complex place
And if we just closed our eyes and say
there's nothing to learn from China
Then all the knowledge of how to do
things in governments
and like everything about
We have all the knowledge in the West
And there is absolutely nothing
to learn from China
I think this is like a pretty
dangerous approach
Which will ultimately not help us
and not help our values
So I just want to strongly object
to that approach
So
Back to AI
I think AI is like super important
and a really big topic
But it was not like directly relevant
in COVID
Mainly
Many places in governments
and as a whole
failed to use reasonably
much simpler technology
For predicting COVID you don't need
you typically don't need AI
You need pretty old boring
epidemiological modeling
Thank you
I don’t know Mr. Breyer
if you would like to react
on what has been said
when it comes to China
and if we can learn something from China
Mr Breyer, would you like to react?
Yeah sure
It’s an interesting debate
and I know that
even the Czeh Republic and Prague
have been very critical of China
and actually quite courageous
in standing up against their policies
Of course I'm not opposed to speaking
and engaging in a scientific dialogue
But too often
it's been forgotten the context
in which this kind of research
is being done
Or in which these policies
are being applied in China
That a lot of them is only possible
because they have this oppressive regime
where people are not given a choice
Where there is no open debate
Where there is no open dissent
that is possible
And even in the field of science,
that really relies on critical debate,
which is only within very tight limits
possible in China
And so there is a danger that China
does stuff that
fundamentally violates human rights
And that we forget this context
And then actually find it quite
useful or attractive
and just forget the context
which has made it possible
to develop and implement this at all
But I would also like to agree
with Jan Kulveit regarding this
buzzword of artificial intelligence
That is often really not intelligence
but rather dumb statistics
And the most prominent example of all
these called AI
but often it doesn't really involve
a lot of intelligence
is biometrics mass surveillance
And in the context of the pandemic,
for example in Moscow,
this has been used to enforce
the quarantine
So they have this
biometrics surveillance system
connected to CCTV cameras
all over Moscow
And they are actually using it
to find people
who violate their quarantine
and would send the police
to find or arrest you
if you violated that
And the risk that comes with this is
that
first of all, the technology is
becoming mandatory
because it works less well
on certain groups of people
like people of colour or elderly
But also it is, of course, used to
target specific groups particularly
Including dissenters and protesters
And it creates a chilling effect
where people sort of feel whenever
they move somewhere
somebody might be following
and tracing them
And you don't actually know
if you are in the database
If somebody is interested
in your movements
So it’s a system of offline tracking
and you’d be cautious
mass surveillance
that we need to stop from
Prevent from happening in Europe
And that's why we started an initiative
in the European Parliament
For a ban of these biometrics mass
surveillance technologies in the EU
Thank you very much
I have a question for Mr. Jann
We are now talking about these softwares
for example for facial recognition
Do you think that it is acceptable
for the society
for the people
to deploy these kinds of technologies
in order to improve the surveillance?
Are people ready to be, let's say,
be overviewed by the artificial intelligence?
No, this is of course
This is a highly dangerous question
And there are, I mean
I must say I don't really see
the danger so much in the EU
but maybe there Patrick Breyer
is closer to the source than I am
But, I mean, in oppressive regimes
of course
They are using COVID now
as a justification for
ruling out all kinds of
additional surveillance
I think
Again we have to ask,
are these really effective, right?
And I think I agree with
the previous speakers there
that I don't really know of
any use case where AI
has really made a big difference to
fighting the pandemic, right?
So I mean of course
Additional surveillance that might
involve AI maybe yes
But in a acceptable way not
And I think also there again
we should not get distracted by that one
so maybe we should use everything that
has more benefits than cost
But we should not get distracted
by these discussions
because what really fight the pandemic
and what for example prevents the virus
from spreading
is a simple mask, right?
So that is really low tech
There is no AI
There is not even regressions or
machine learning in masks, right?
Just put on a mask
Just not got to events
Just not meet people at home
and in badly ventilated places
And those are the very basic things
So what we really need is
basic human intelligence
Not advance artificial intelligence
for these problems, right?
And we should really not get distracted
with these discussions
Thank you very much
That's a very good point
I think that we need human intelligence
especially
more than artificial intelligence,
let’s say
I have now a question for Mr. Zandl
Who is again very aware of the situation
in the Czech Republic
We were talking about
the artificial intelligence
and about difference
between artificial intelligence
and just the role of
statistics and modeling
Do you think that right now our Czech
government
or other governments in Europe
are efficiently using these data or
technologies that are here right now?
Or
Do you think that, for example,
we have technologies
We have data but the governments
are not using them effectively?
Please Mr. Zandl
I think it's quite a broad topic
What does it mean when we say
you died with COVID?
Does it mean that you have been tested
after the death
and you are positive?
Or does it mean that we are not testing
you after death
and we just keep your previous test?
It means we have a lot of data
but the data are not taken
the same way
Country by the country
It varies
This is the first problem
The second problem in Czech Republic
we have really low level of
digitalisation of state processes
It means we even have no sufficient data
and we are not ready to work with them
We are not ready to analyse them
on the government level
And that's a huge problem
and you may
with the second wave of pandemic
we were totally unprepared
Like in the first wave, of course, there was
not a difference
That's our main problem
we are not ready to use data
and the government has not mentally
shifted from the old fashion way
working with papers and pens
to the new way working with data
Sorry for that
Thank you very much
I would like to ask again
our participants
to give us their comments or questions
to the chat
And I have now also question
for Mr. Kulveit
which is related to
what has been said already
How to like kind of push the national
government to really use the data
and the modeling
that are really on the table?
Because you already mentioned,
Mr. Kulveit, that
when we are talking about artificial intelligence
it's not about the real intelligence
but it's mostly discussion about the
statistics and modelling let’s say
What do you think about that?
Do you think that governments are using
these data that are provided by you,
by the experts,
efficiently or how should we like
push them to really do it?
Please Mr. Kulveit
So I mean
In practice I would say there are really
big differences between countries
Like
In February
I really was like
As a field epidemic modelling
Will maybe
will be used in just some of the bigger
countries like US or UK
So we’ve started a project
called epidemic forecasting
where we ended up advising
multiple places
which were like a bit underpowered
in terms of epidemic modelling
I would say there are like big
differences between countries
so probably the best thing is
just to look around
How these sources reflects
scientific information
are integrated in decision making
in different places
And like look what
basically what organizational structure
allows efficient flow of information
So
I mean I would just like try to learn
from some of the better cases in Europe
Also while in the US
While, for example, in the US
many things failed
in the political level
I think on the way
how to integrate some
basic forecasting and epidemic modelling
like US CDC is doing is doing a job
like it's playing
like a set of multimodel
Like basically different academic places
are like currently on models
CDC collects the data and
displays some like aggregate forecast
So
kind of everyone can see some
short time forecast and so on
Yeah, that's probably the basic concept
Sorry a bit to the previous question
How AI could be used
In a broader context
I think actually AI could be super
useful in the future
in like preventing, for example,
the next pandemic
where we can imagine some
like biosurveying system
like for example
collecting sample of the air
in all big airports
and analysing
if some new infectious agent
is in the air
So this would be like
really machine learning
Heavy project processing
like extreme amounts of data
So I think is like
in terms of where AI really
could be important
So like preventing worse
next and worse pandemic
Like it could be important
that this is unfortunately a topic
which draws
a really small fraction of
attention paid to COVID
or like face recognition and so on
Maybe my epilogue will be not focus
so much on the
shiny topics like facial recognition
Where there's a lot of controversy
about it and so on
But maybe there's so much potential to
use AI for the really important things
So sorry for late reply
to the last question
Thank you very much Mr. Kulveit
I have a question related to the future
because now we are facing the pandemic
and it seems
that we will have to deal with it
another few more weeks
or maybe also months
A year
A year at least
Thank you
A year
And now we also deployed
many modern technologies
like tracing apps,
like the artificial intelligence
or the data and statistics
and the modeling
So I’m interested
what do you think will happen after
this COVID19
or COVID20 pandemic will end?
Do you think that these technologies
will be still on the table?
That they will become permanent,
let’s say
permanent issues
permanent parts of our daily lives?
And what do you think Mr. Jann?
is it just like a temporary digital
world we are living now?
or is it for next decades?
Well, I mean
the oppressive regimes that are
rolling out video surveillance
and face recognition and so on
that of course will probably
not disappear
So that's the biggest problem
I think here
I mean these bluetooth tracing apps
they have no use at all, right?
I mean once we have a vaccination rate
of maybe 50% - 60%
which again will take maybe a year,
maybe more
Maybe will never be reached
if we lose the kind of
fight about whether vaccines
are good or not
Then these Bluetooth apps
have no more use
so I think they will disappear
I think I mean we will go back from
Zoom meetings to real meetings
Some meetings will stay Zoom meetings
Some meetings that should have been
Zoom meetings before the pandemic
will stay to be Zoom meetings
I think I want to say
one more thing about data
Because we were talking here about data
and do government use the data correctly
and is there enough data and so on
And I think what we really need
to be clear here
that there is not a supply problem
Okay, so we don't have a problem
that there is too little data
We really have a demand problem
So because politicians
they have the data that they would need
to make the most basic decisions
They could ask for more data
So we have these institutes that are
able to produce more data
But if you look at the Czech Republic
the first lockdown we got
Because some guy
With all due respect
Some guy made an Excel sheet
and talked his way into
the prime minister office, right?
In the second wave,
the lockdown happened far too late
even though in August everyone
who read the data carefully
could see that we were headed
for a catastrophe right?
And still in late August the most
basic measures were vetoed
at the highest level of government,
right?
So and then of course,
I mean, if we had better data
about mobility
or more high frequency data or so
that might now
nerds like myself or Jan Kulveit,
sorry Honza,
that might allow us to be slightly
faster in predicting
or might make slightly more
accurate predictions, right?
But if at the highest level of
government there’s, I mean, basic
What you could call almost
statistical illiteracy, right?
That kind of ignores
these steady growths
This steady exponential growth
of case numbers that we saw from
I mean, that we could kind of see
already in July
but that we really saw in August
And doesn't make decisions
based on that
Then we really have to say
it is a demand problem
Not a supply problem
because all the data you needed
to predict that
was freely available at dozen of places
on the internet
Thank you very much
I’m interested if this kind of
demand problem
mentioned by Mr. Jann
is kind of a Czech problem
or if we could see or example the same problem
in Germany
I don't know Mr. Breyer if you are aware
of this similar let's say story
As it was mentioned by Mr. Jann that
a man came into
our prime minister office
and presented him the Excel sheet
with data
and then the lockdown begin
I don't know
Do you think that in Germany
this demand for the data
to provide better decisions is better?
Mr. Breyer
Well the decision making in a democracy
of course is a political process, right?
And not a scientific one
So it would always
depend on various factors
and not all of them would be
scientifically viable
I agree with Mr. Jann that
we do have some knowledge
and recommendations from scientists
that could be used to make
those political decisions
about what steps to go
and the lockdown, etcetera
And so there was not really a lack of
There could always be
a better knowledge but
I think it is good enough
to take good decisions
and we’ve seen examples of countries
acting responsibly
and dealing quite well with the pandemic
But I’m concerned that
whereas traditionally
science has worked
with experiments with volunteers
that there's an increasing hunger for
what they call real world data
And real world data is, of course,
everybody's data
without asking people for their consent
And one example of that we’ve seen is
the mobile phone data
Which they are now probably anonymizing
to be able to, you know,
tell people's movements
But even without the names
and even if you accumulate movements
This can easily be used
for different purposes
for example, the police or intelligence
agencies can be very interested
in where a large number of
people have assembled
at a given time
And they can then of course
very easily follow up
with telecommunication providers
and ask for the names
And ask, you know, who has it been that
Those 50 or 100 people that have met
in this place
And maybe it was
a political coordination
maybe somebody planning a protest
and didn’t want the police
and the government to know
And that’s why it's very tricky to get
the anonymization truly right
and even with anonymization
it doesn't mean
That you cannot reverse it
and that’s why
I'm a strong defender for
for the approach to use samples
And to use volunteer data
and to keep people in control
of what happens to
their information
about their private life,
about their medical conditions,
etcetera pp
Thank you very much Mr. Breyer
I’m very sorry but our time is
already over
Because
Yeah, the discussion was great
Thank you very much
for all your contributions
Thank you for all the participants
who were watching us for the whole time
and also commenting through the chat